# Chunk Description

Each malloc call returns the requested bytes of dynamic memory. Each portion of dynamic memory returned to a process has some bookkeeping attached to it by the allocator. This bookkeeping is kept in a structure called `malloc_chunk`.

***A chunk is a piece of metadata associated with a portion of dynamic memory.*** But when we say "a chunk of memory", it refers to the (chunk_metadata + dynamic_memory).

When the allocator returns the pointer to the dynamic memory carved for the request, we have this metadata chunk sitting right before the payload memory, like this:
```
metadata payload
         ^
         pointer returned to the process
```

The layout of this chunk is as follows:
```c
struct malloc_chunk {

  INTERNAL_SIZE_T       mchunk_prev_size;
  INTERNAL_SIZE_T       mchunk_size;

  struct malloc_chunk*  fd;
  struct malloc_chunk*  bk;

  struct malloc_chunk*  fd_nextsize;
  struct malloc_chunk*  bk_nextsize;
};
```

The authors have acknowledged that this layout is "misleading" in the annotations in malloc.c.
```
/*
  This struct declaration is misleading (but accurate and necessary).
  It declares a "view" into memory allowing access to necessary
  fields at known offsets from a given base. See explanation below.
*/
```
But in my view, the layout is well-reasoned and the lack of reasoning makes it so.

The following is my attempt to make that reasoning visible. It is divided in two parts: 1) explanation of the struct layout, and 2) the actual usage of this layout.

## Chunk Layout Description

The allocator divides allocation sizes as **small** and **large**. Starting from 0, up to a threshold, all the requests are considered small. After that threshold, all the requests are large. Therefore, we have two types of chunks based on **size**.

A chunk can exist in two states: **in-use** and **free**.
  - In-use chunks (both small and large) are self-managed and require nothing beyond the chunk metadata.
  - Free chunks require extra bookkeeping as they are candidates for future malloc requests. Small chunks and large chunks are managed differently.

Based on the information above, the allocator has to manage 3 states of chunks.
  1. **In-use chunks**: chunks the process is actively using (both small and large).
  2. **Small free chunks**: small chunks the process has freed.
  3. **Large free chunks**: large chunks the process has freed.

---

Here is a high level description of how the allocator uses malloc_chunk to represent these 3 states of chunks.

`mchunk_prev_size` stores the size of the previous chunk and `mchunk_size` holds the size of the current chunk.
  - **Note1: size means (chunk_metadata + dynamic_memory).**
  - **Note2: INTERNAL_SIZE_T is a tunable parameter which we will explore in the upcoming sections. For now, consider it `size_t`.**

Free chunks are managed via bins, which are "**circular doubly linked lists**". We have small bins for small chunks and large bins for large chunks.

Small bins manage free chunks of exact size classes, while large bins manage free chunks falling in specific size ranges. For example:
  - we have a small bin of size class 80 bytes. It contains free chunks which have a size of 80 bytes.
  - we have a large bin of size range [1024, 1088) bytes. It manages free chunks of sizes falling in that range. Example - 1024, 1040 and so on.
  - **Note: we will explore the design of these bins in depth in upcoming sections.**

A small bin manage a **linked list** of these free chunks using the `fd/bk` pointers.

A large bin manage two types of links between its free chunks.
  - The `fd/bk` pointers manage links between each free chunk in the bin.
  - Although a large bin manage chunks falling in a specific range, there can be free chunks of same size as well. To link these chunks on top of the generic links, we use the `fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize` pointers.
  - For example, a large bin that manage chunks in this range [1024, 1088) had three free chunks of sizes 1024, 1056, 1024. The three chunks will be linked via fd/bk and the two 1024 size chunks will have an extra fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize link.

Therefore, ***`malloc_chunk` is a generic implementation, designed to provide a single consistent interface for all the three states in which a chunk can exist.*** This is the reasoning behind the layout.

## Usage Description

On 64-bit Linux, both size_t and pointers are 8-bytes wide. Therefore, the size of malloc_chunk is (8*6) 48 bytes. We can verify this with sizeof as well. Just create a c file, copy the definition, create an object and use `sizeof()`.

**Note: For simplicity, we do all the calculations on 64-bit Linux. But the rules are the same for 32-bit Linux. Just use 4 instead of 8.**

Let's discuss our priorities.
  1. mchunk_prev_size and mchunk_size are required in all the cases.
  2. In an in-use chunk, the four pointers aren't useful.
  3. In a small free chunk, fd/bk are required and fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize aren't useful.
  4. In a large free chunk, everything is required.

Based on the priorities above, can we say the following:
  - In an in-use chunk, fd/bk/fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize are garbage, or dereferencing is not defined for them?
  - In a small free chunk, fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize are garbage, or dereferencing is not defined for them?

If we are on the same page, the answer should be "YES".
  - If not a clear "YES", I'd recommend reading from the start again to fill the gaps.
  - It is crucial to agree here to understand everything else.

---

We have two ways to implement this design.
  - **Method1:** Set the required members appropriately and the not required ones NULL.
  - **Method2:** Only set the required members and don't worry about the rest.

In method1, we have to allocate 48 bytes for the metadata, followed by the payload memory. This wastes 24 bytes per in-use chunk, regardless of small or large.

In method2, we have to allocate only 16 bytes for the metadata, followed by the payload memory. This is a better utilization of memory and reduces the overall footprint.

We have two questions to answer.

**Ques1:** "What we will achieve by this meager optimization?". Yes, memory is not a scarce resource today, but that doesn't gives us the right to waste it. Modern operating systems come with huge memory and a high number of processes.
  - If used recklessly, no amount of memory will ever suffice.
  - We have IoT devices and embedded systems, with considerable hardware constraints. Wasting memory is not an option there.

**Ques2:** "Doesn't method2 violates the struct integrity?" It doesn't. Because, we are allocating in heap. We are responsible for managing it. If we dereference a member which is not meant to be dereferenced, we are responsible for the fallout. The allocator knows it, and never does it.

Clearly, method2 is the winner. As a naive myself, the design is not beginner-friendly at all. If you can't understand it in a few minutes, remember, I've invested 4-5 days, reading the annotations and fighting this design.
  - The first step in understanding systems code is to acknowledge the author's design, come with a design you think is better, then contradict it with the author's design.
  - Either you will find a better one, or you will understand the author's design and the constraints that influenced it.

*Therefore, sizeof is not a considerable property of the malloc_chunk struct.*

---

There is one last thing before we are done with the usage. It is about `mchunk_prev_size` and struct integrity.


CONTINUE HERE


To understand this process, we need to understand "chunk overhead" and "minimum chunk size".
  - "Chunk overhead" refers to the minimum size required to maintain the metadata for a chunk of memory.
  - "Minimum chunk size" refers to the minimum allocatable size. We will revisit it soon.

Chunk overhead is 16 bytes, which includes mchunk_prev_size and mchunk_size.

But, when a chunk is freed, we need at least 32 bytes to be able to manage prev_size, size, fd and bk. That's why, the minimum chunk size is 32 bytes.

Therefore, in an in-use chunk, only mchunk_prev_size and mchunk_size are valid, meaning, only the initial 16 bytes are useful. The dynamic memory that is returned to the process starts where `fd` is.
  - But where does fd/bk/fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize go? Nowhere. They exist, but dereferencing is not defined as they are not valid.

When an in-use chunk is freed, it can be a small free chunk or a large free chunk.
  - In case of the smallest possible chunk, which is sized 32 bytes, there is no space for fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize, but that doesn't mean they don't exist. They are simply garbage and the allocator never dereferences them.
  - In case of small chunks greater than 32 bytes, all the 6 members exist, but again, only the initial 32 bytes are the useful bytes.
  - In case of large free chunks, all the 6 members exist and dereferencing is defined on them. You don't have to worry about the size being enough to accommodate the pointers because it is a large chunk with at least a 1000 bytes of memory.

---


ACCOUNT FOR struct declared 8 bytes before the previous chunk's boundary.



A quick question that comes to our mind is that: "how is it possible? Isn't that violating struct integrity?"
  - No. Because the allocator is managing the layout of the memory itself.
  - Struct layout is managed by the compiler when allocated on stack. The allocator is allocating on dynamic memory, not static memory, it can allocate anywhere.
  - And it is not a problem that the current chunk starts bytes inside the boundary of the previous chunk's dynamic memory because that memory is managed only when the previous chunk is freed by the process.

The first and the last chunks are special chunks, and we will talk about them in an upcoming section.

The pointer to the dynamic memory that is returned to the process always point to the memory where `fd` is in the struct. This is not wrong because, in an in-use chunk, fd/bk/fd_nextsize/bk_nextsize are not required, so dereferencing is not defined for them. Therefore, we are not overwriting any memory and the chunk overhead remains minimum.

---

As we will explore the rest of the code, we will find that this design is "very well thought-out". It solves problems so efficiently with the least amount of overhead possible.

Therefore, the design is not misleading, it only lacks enough context that reveals the beauty of it.

---

***`size_t` is the guarantee from the C standard to be an unsigned data type which is exactly as wide as the pointer type on an architecture, regardless of the platform's data model. Essentially, size_t is a data type which is wide enough to contain the largest addressable value in an architecture.***
